README.md, before:

# agda-unused

`agda-unused` checks for unused code in an Agda project, including:

- variables
- definitions
- postulates
- data & record types
- `import` statements
- `open` statements
- pattern synonyms

`agda-unused` takes a filepath representing an Agda module and checks for unused
code in that module and its dependencies. By default, `agda-unused` does not
check public items that could be imported elsewhere. But with the `--global`
flag, `agda-unused` treats the given module as the sole entry point for the
project, and additionally checks for unused files and unused public items in
dependencies. (See below for more on the `--global` flag.)

Supported Agda versions: `>= 2.6.1 && < 2.6.2`

## Example

File `~/Test.agda`:

```
module Test where

open import Agda.Builtin.Bool
  using (Bool; false; true)
open import Agda.Builtin.Unit

_∧_
  : Bool
  → Bool
  → Bool
false ∧ x
  = false
_ ∧ y
  = y
```

Command:

```
$ agda-unused Test.agda
```

Output:

```
/home/user/Test.agda:4,23-27
  unused imported item ‘true’
/home/user/Test.agda:5,1-30
  unused import ‘Agda.Builtin.Unit’
/home/user/Test.agda:11,9-10
  unused variable ‘x’
```

## Usage

```
Usage: agda-unused FILE [-r|--root ROOT] [-g|--global] [-j|--json]
  Check for unused code in FILE

Available options:
  -h,--help                Show this help text
  FILE                     Path of file to check
  -r,--root ROOT           Path of project root directory
  -g,--global              Check public items in dependencies
  -j,--json                Format output as JSON
```

If `--root` is not given, we use the current directory as the project root.

## Global

If the `--global` flag is given, we perform a global check, treating the given
module as the sole entry point for the project. The publicly accessible items in
the given module, both definitions and re-exports using `public`, are treated as
the public interface of the project, and will not be marked unused. The publicly
accessible items in dependencies of the given module may be marked unused,
unlike the default behavior. We also check for unused files.

To perform a global check on an Agda project, you may want to create a special
module that imports and re-exports exactly the intended public interface of your
project. For example:

File `All.agda`:

```
module All where

open import A public
  using (f)
open import B public
  hiding (g)
open import C public
```

Command:

```
$ agda-unused All.agda --global
```

## JSON

If the `--json` flag is given, the output is a JSON object with two fields:

- `type`: One of `"none"`, `"unused"`, `"error"`.
- `message`: A string, the same as the usual output of `agda-unused`.

The `"none"` type indicates that there is no unused code.

## Approach

We make a single pass through the given Agda module and its dependencies:

- When a new item (variable, definition, etc.) appears, we mark it unused.
- When an existing item appears, we mark it used.

This means, for example, if we have three definitions (say `f`, `g`, `h`), each
depending on the previous one, where `h` is not a root, then `f` and `g` are
considered used, while `h` is considered unused. If we remove `h` and run
`agda-unsed` again, it will now report that `g` is unused. This behavior is
different from Haskell's built-in tool, which would report that all three
identifiers are unused on the first run.

## Limitations

We currently do not support the following Agda features:

- [record module instance applications](https://agda.readthedocs.io/en/v2.6.1.3/language/module-system.html#parameterised-modules)
- [unquoting declarations](https://agda.readthedocs.io/en/v2.6.1.3/language/reflection.html#id3)
- [external libraries](https://agda.readthedocs.io/en/v2.6.1.3/tools/package-system.html)
(other than Agda's built-in libraries)

`agda-unused` will produce an error if your code uses these language features.

Commit message:

infer root directory using .agda-lib file

README.md, after:

# agda-unused

`agda-unused` checks for unused code in an Agda project, including:

- variables
- definitions
- postulates
- data & record types
- `import` statements
- `open` statements
- pattern synonyms

`agda-unused` takes a filepath representing an Agda module and checks for unused
code in that module and its dependencies. By default, `agda-unused` does not
check public items that could be imported elsewhere. But with the `--global`
flag, `agda-unused` treats the given module as the sole entry point for the
project, and additionally checks for unused files and unused public items in
dependencies. (See below for more on the `--global` flag.)

Supported Agda versions: `>= 2.6.1 && < 2.6.2`

## Example

File `~/Test.agda`:

```
module Test where

open import Agda.Builtin.Bool
  using (Bool; false; true)
open import Agda.Builtin.Unit

_∧_
  : Bool
  → Bool
  → Bool
false ∧ x
  = false
_ ∧ y
  = y
```

Command:

```
$ agda-unused Test.agda
```

Output:

```
/home/user/Test.agda:4,23-27
  unused imported item ‘true’
/home/user/Test.agda:5,1-30
  unused import ‘Agda.Builtin.Unit’
/home/user/Test.agda:11,9-10
  unused variable ‘x’
```

## Usage

```
Usage: agda-unused FILE [-r|--root ROOT] [-g|--global] [-j|--json]
  Check for unused code in FILE

Available options:
  -h,--help                Show this help text
  FILE                     Path of file to check
  -r,--root ROOT           Path of project root directory
  -g,--global              Check public items in dependencies
  -j,--json                Format output as JSON
```

The project root directory is determined as follows:

- If the `--root` option is given, its value is the project root.
- Otherwise, the nearest ancestor of the current directory with an `.agda-lib`
  file is the project root, if any.
- Otherwise, we take the current directory as the project root.

## Global

If the `--global` flag is given, we perform a global check, treating the given
module as the sole entry point for the project. The publicly accessible items in
the given module, both definitions and re-exports using `public`, are treated as
the public interface of the project, and will not be marked unused. The publicly
accessible items in dependencies of the given module may be marked unused,
unlike the default behavior. We also check for unused files.

To perform a global check on an Agda project, you may want to create a special
module that imports and re-exports exactly the intended public interface of your
project. For example:

File `All.agda`:

```
module All where

open import A public
  using (f)
open import B public
  hiding (g)
open import C public
```

Command:

```
$ agda-unused All.agda --global
```

## JSON

If the `--json` flag is given, the output is a JSON object with two fields:

- `type`: One of `"none"`, `"unused"`, `"error"`.
- `message`: A string, the same as the usual output of `agda-unused`.

The `"none"` type indicates that there is no unused code.

## Approach

We make a single pass through the given Agda module and its dependencies:

- When a new item (variable, definition, etc.) appears, we mark it unused.
- When an existing item appears, we mark it used.

This means, for example, if we have three definitions (say `f`, `g`, `h`), each
depending on the previous one, where `h` is not a root, then `f` and `g` are
considered used, while `h` is considered unused. If we remove `h` and run
`agda-unsed` again, it will now report that `g` is unused. This behavior is
different from Haskell's built-in tool, which would report that all three
identifiers are unused on the first run.

## Limitations

We currently do not support the following Agda features:

- [record module instance applications](https://agda.readthedocs.io/en/v2.6.1.3/language/module-system.html#parameterised-modules)
- [unquoting declarations](https://agda.readthedocs.io/en/v2.6.1.3/language/reflection.html#id3)
- [external libraries](https://agda.readthedocs.io/en/v2.6.1.3/tools/package-system.html)
(other than Agda's built-in libraries)

`agda-unused` will produce an error if your code uses these language features.
